World of Tales
The lion and the crane
Indian Folktale

The Bodhisatta was at one time born in the region of Himavanta as a white crane; now Brahmadatta was at that time reigning in Benares. Now it chanced that as a lion was eating meat a bone stuck in his throat. The throat became swollen, he could not take food, his suffering was terrible. The crane seeing him, as he was perched an a tree looking for food, asked, "What ails thee, friend?" He told him why. "I could free thee from that bone, friend, but dare not enter thy mouth for fear thou mightest eat me." "Don't be afraid, friend, I'll not eat thee; only save my life." "Very well," says he, and caused him to lie down on his left side. But thinking to himself, "Who knows what this fellow will do," he placed a small stick upright between his two jaws that he could not close his mouth, and inserting his head inside his mouth struck one end of the bone with his beak. Whereupon the bone dropped and fell out. As soon as he had caused the bone to fall, he got out of the lion's mouth, striking the stick with his beak so that it fell out, and then settled on a branch. The lion gets well, and one day was eating a buffalo he had killed. The crane, thinking "I will sound him," settled an a branch just over him, and in conversation spoke this first verse:

  "A service have we done thee
    To the best of our ability,
  King of the Beasts! Your Majesty!
    What return shall we get from thee?"
In reply the Lion spoke the second verse:

  "As I feed on blood,
    And always hunt for prey,
  'Tis much that thou art still alive
    Having once been between my teeth."
Then in reply the crane said the two other verses:

  "Ungrateful, doing no good,
    Not doing as he would be done by,
  In him there is no gratitude,
    To serve him is useless.
  "His friendship is not won
    By the clearest good deed.
  Better softly withdraw from him,
    Neither envying nor abusing."
And having thus spoken the crane flew away.

And when the great Teacher, Gautama the Buddha, told this tale, he used to add: "Now at that time the lion was Devadatta the Traitor, but the white crane was I myself."

 

Indian fairy tales
Indian folktales

Notes: Selected and edited by Joseph Jacobs, the book holds 29 Indian folktales.

Author: Various
Editor: Joseph Jacobs
Published: 1910
Publisher: G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York, London



Book Spotlight
Bechstein book coverThe Book of German Folk- and Fairy Tales
Copyright 2008 - 2024 - Privacy policy - Terms of service - About
Stories for children
from around the world!
Home
Folktales
African folktales
Nigerian folktales
South African folktales
Tanzanian folktales
Asian folktales
Arabic folktales
Chinese folktales
Indian folktales
Japanese folktales
Filipino folktales
Australian folktales
European folktales
Celtic folktales
Germanic folktales
Romanic folktales
Slavic folktales
North American folktales
Native American folktales
US folktales
Canadian folktales
South American folktales
Brazilian folktales
Users folktales
Fairy tales
Andersen's fairy tales
Bechstein's fairy tales
Grimms' fairy tales
Grimms' biography
Lang's fairy tales
Perrault's fairy tales
Bedtime Stories
Cinderella
Little Red Riding Hood
Snow White
The Snow Queen
The Ugly Duckling
Puss in Boots
The Sleeping Beauty
Beauty and the Beast
The Little Mermaid
The Princess and the Pea
The Goose Girl
The red shoes
The Frog Prince
The Fairy
The naughty boy
Hansel and Grethel
Snow-White And Rose-Red
Blue Beard
The Valiant Little Tailor
Rumpelstiltskin
The emperor's new clothes
The Elves and the Shoemaker
Jack and the Beanstalk
Goldilocks and the Bears
Little Thumb
Golden Goose
Fables
Users stories
Other stories
Books A-Z
Aricles
Useful links
Contact
Options


Search



Font size
  
